[Refactor] Model Checklist Document (#2043)
huggingface/hub-docs: docs/hub/model-release-checklist.md

# Model(s) Release Checklist

The [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models) is the go-to platform for sharing machine learning models.
A well-executed release can boost your model's visibility and impact. This section covers **essential** steps for a concise, informative, and user-friendly model release.

## ⏳ Preparing Your Model for Release

### Upload Model Weights

When uploading models to the Hub, follow these best practices:

- **Use separate repositories for different model weights**:

>    Create individual repositories for each variant of the same architecture. This lets you group them into a [collection](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/collections), which users prefer when browsing many options. It also improves visibility because each model has its own URL (`hf.co/org/model-name`) and is easier to search.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Create individual repositories for each variant of the same architecture. This lets you group them into a [collection](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/collections), which are easier to navigate than directory listings. It also improves visibility because each model has its own URL (`hf.co/org/model-name`), makes search easier, and provides download counts for each one of your models.
```

Reviewer 2: not sure if needed but we could also mention that it makes it easier to integrate with downstream libraries too.

Author: @Vaibhavs10 how do you mean? I thought downstream libraries only benefit from `transformers` integration. If you could guide me into understanding this point better I will add it here.

- **Prefer [`safetensors`](https://huggingface.co/docs/safetensors/en/index) over `pickle` for weight serialization.**:
   `safetensors` is safer and often faster than Python’s `pickle`. If you have a `.bin` pickle file, use the [weight conversion tool](https://huggingface.co/docs/safetensors/en/convert-weights) to convert it quickly.

### Write a Comprehensive Model Card

A well-crafted model card (the `README.md` in your repository) is essential for discoverability, reproducibility, and effective sharing. Include:

1. **Metadata Configuration**:
   The [metadata section](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/model-cards#model-card-metadata) at the top of your model card (YAML) is key for search and categorization. Include:
   ```yaml
   ---
   pipeline_tag: text-generation    # Specify the task
   library_name: transformers       # Specify the library
   language:
     - en                           # List language for your model
   license: apache-2.0              # Specify a license
   datasets:
     - username/dataset             # List datasets used for training

>    base_model: username/base-model  # If applicable

Reviewer 2: also merges btw

   Document known limitations, biases, and ethical considerations so users can make informed choices.

To make the process more seamless, click **Import model card template** to pre-fill the `README.md`s with placeholders.

| ![model card template button on the hub ui](../../assets/model-card-template-button.png) | ![model card template on the hub](../../assets/model-card-template.png) |
|:--: | :--: |
| The button to import the model card template | A section of the imported template |

### Enhance Model Discoverability and Usability

To maximize reach and usability::

1. **Library Integration**:
   Add support for one of the many [libraries integrated with the Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/models-libraries) (such as `transformers`, `diffusers`, `sentence-transformers`, `timm`). This integration significantly increases your model's accessibility and provides users with code snippets for working with your model.

  To specify that your model works with the `transformers` library:
   ```yaml
   ---
   library_name: transformers
   ---
   ```

   | ![code snippet tab](../../assets/code-snippet.png) |
   | :--: |
   | Code snippet tab |

>    You can also [create your own model library](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/models-adding-libraries) or add Hub support to another existing library or codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can also [create your own model library](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/models-adding-libraries) or add Hub support to your library and codebase so they know how to download model weights from the Hub.
```

3. **Usage Examples**:
   Provide clear, copy-and-run code snippets for inference, fine-tuning, or other common tasks. Keep edits needed by users to a minimum.

   *Bonus*: Add a well-structured `notebook.ipynb` in the repo so users can open it in [Google Colab and Kaggle Notebooks](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/notebooks) directly.

   | ![colab and kaggle button](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/release-checklist/colab-kaggle.png) |
   | :--: |
   | Google and Kaggle Usage Buttons |

4. **Technical Specifications**:
   Include training parameters, hardware needs, and other details that help users run the model effectively.

5. **Performance Metrics**:
   Share benchmarks and evaluation results. Include quantitative metrics and qualitative examples to show strengths and limitations.

6. **Limitations and Biases**:
   Document known limitations, biases, and ethical considerations so users can make informed choices.

To make the process more seamless, click **Import model card template** to pre-fill the `README.md`s with placeholders.

> | ![model card template button on the hub ui](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/release-checklist/model-card-template-button.png) | ![model card template on the hub](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/hub/release-checklist/model-card-template.png) |

Reviewer: Not sure how this will render in a table, given that the left button is very wide. I tried to check [here](https://moon-ci-docs.huggingface.co/docs/hub/pr_2043/en/model-release-checklist), but images are not shown for some reason:

<img width="773" height="211" alt="Screenshot 2025-11-13 at 11 22 57" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f8b228e1-93f8-4b73-80eb-5beae560b538" />

### Access Control and Visibility

1. **Visibility Settings**:

>    When ready to share your model, switch it to public in your [model settings](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/repositories-settings). Before doing so, double-check that all documentation and code examples to ensure they're accurate and complete

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When ready to share your model, switch it to public in your [model settings](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/repositories-settings). Before doing so, double-check that all documentation and code examples to ensure they're accurate and complete.
```

2. **Gated Access**:
   If your model needs controlled access, use the [gated access feature](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/models-gated) and clearly state the conditions users must meet. This is important for models with dual-use concerns or commercial restrictions.

## 🏁 After Releasing Your Model

A successful model release extends beyond the initial publication. To maintain quality and maximize impact:

### Maintenance and Community Engagement

1. **Verify Functionality**:
   After release, test all code snippets in a clean environment to confirm they work as expected. This ensures users can run your model without errors or confusion.

   For example, if your model is a `transformers` compatible LLM:
   ```python
   from transformers import pipeline

   # This should run without errors
   pipe = pipeline("text-generation", model="your-username/your-model")
   result = pipe("Your test prompt")
   print(result)
   ```

2. **Share Share Share**:
   Most users discover models through social media, chat channels (like Slack or Discord), or newsletters. Share your model links in these spaces, and also add them to your website or GitHub repositories.
   

>    The more visits and likes your model receives, the higher it appears in the [Hugging Face trending section](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending), bringing even more visibility

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The more visits and likes your model receives, the higher it appears on the [Hugging Face Trending section](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending), bringing even more visibility.
```
